# Jan 17

## Darwinism and Macroevolution

### Ernst Mayr 1904 - 2005

[Ernst Mayr](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernst_Mayr) \[[NAS biographical memoir](https://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/mayr-ernst.pdf)\] was an ornithologist, evolutionary biologist, one of the authors of the modern synthesis, and later a philosopher of science. 

Mayr was born in Germany and like many biologists of his age was expected to become a physician. However, he loved birds, and during his studies was encourged to pursue ornithology through museum work by his mentor Stresemann. He completed his doctoral dissertation in ornithology at the age of 21. During his disseration he went on field collecting trips in the tropics, includuing New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, where he saw unprecedented diversity and described dozens of species. These field experiences were no doubt very inflential in his thinking and his later ideas on reproductive isolation, the biological species concept, and peripatric speciation. 

Mayr moved to the US in 1931 to take an appointment at the American Museum of Natural History. In 1942 he wrote _Systematics and the Origin of Species_, one of the books that expanded "Darwinism" into the _modern synthesis_ of Mendelian genetics, systematics, and Darwinian evolution. Mayr was aslo very influential in birding societies and influencing ornithological reseach, which in America had become very taxonomically oriented. He encouraged the study of living birds, field trips, and natural history observations, and for all birders to study a research problem of their own. Mayr seemed to enjoy vigorous debate and was critical of early mathetmatical approches to evolution, Dawkinʻs focus on genes as the target of selection, and reductionsim. He thought about visibility to selection and more integrative views considering the whole organism.   

Acknowledgement: I am grateful for these wonderful annotations below by Dr. Allan Larson

2. [Mayr, E. 1982](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1ocqMPD5gX9xi4VQy_5OtU5wSyg-X8ftM). *The Growth of Biological Thought*. Harvard Univ. Press. (Pp. 21-78)  **map: Rai**

Mayr, E. (1982) - the philosophical foundations of biological science discussed by a major contributor to the evolutionary synthesis. Mayr's emphasis on quality of concepts and theory as the measure of a science is central to this course. This assignment introduces _hypothetico-deductivism_, _comparative methodology_, _essentialism versus populational thinking_, _hierarchy_, and _reductionism_, all of which are major themes of macroevolution. This is the best concise coverage of these issues that I know.


3. [Mayr, E. 1985](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1ocqMPD5gX9xi4VQy_5OtU5wSyg-X8ftM). Darwin's five theories of evolution. Pp. 755-772 in D. Kohn (ed.) *The Darwinian Heritage*. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.  **map: Dani**

Mayr, E. (1985) - the best summary that I know of the major components of Darwinian evolutionary theory as synthesized in the mid twentieth century by Mayr and others. The subsequent history of macroevolution consists largely of controversies concerning whether and how these principles provide a complete and satisfactory foundation for macroevolutionary studies.

Bibliography:

Mayr E (1942). Systematics and the Origin of Species. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.

Bock, JW (2014). Ernst W Mayr 1904--2005: A biographical memoir. National Academy of Sciences. <https://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/mayr-ernst.pdf>